FF131 document.caretPositionFromPoint() - support for shadow DOM (#35911)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/document/caretpositionfrompoint/index.md

  - : The horizontal coordinate of a point.
- `y`
  - : The vertical coordinate of a point.
- `options` {{optional_inline}}

  - : The following optional properties may also be specified.

    - `shadowRoots` {{optional_inline}}
      - : An array of {{domxref("ShadowRoot")}} objects.
        The method can return a caret position for a node that is defined within the shadow DOM of a supplied shadow root.
        If the caret position falls within a shadow root that is not supplied, the returned `CaretPosition` will be remapped to the node that is the host of the shadow root.

### Return value

A {{domxref('CaretPosition')}} object or `null`.

The returned value is `null` if there is no viewport associated with the document, if the `x` or `y` are negative or outside of the viewport region, or if the coordinates indicate a point where no text insertion point indicator could be inserted.

## Examples

### Split text nodes at caret position in DOM

> This example demonstrates how to get the caret position from a selected DOM node, and use it to insert split the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates how to get the caret position from a selected DOM node, use the position to split the node, and insert a line break between the two nodes.
```

```

```html
<p>
  Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy
  eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam
  voluptua. At vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita
  kasd gubergren, no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.
</p>
```

```html hidden
<pre id="log">Log</pre>
```

```css hidden
#log {
  height: 30px;
  padding: 0.5rem;
  border: 1px solid black;
}
```

```js hidden
const logElement = document.querySelector("#log");
function log(text) {
  logElement.innerText = text;
}

const reload = document.querySelector("#reset");

reload.addEventListener("click", () => {
  window.location.reload(true);
});
```

```css hidden
#message {
  color: red;
  font-weight: bold;
}

#message.fallback {
  color: darkorange;
}

#message.supported {
  color: green;
}
```

#### JavaScript

The method below first checks for `document.caretPositionFromPoint` support and uses it to get the text node and offset at the caret position.
If the browser doesn't support that method, the code then checks for {{domxref("Document.caretRangeFromPoint", "document.caretRangeFromPoint")}}, and uses that instead.

> If the node at the caret position is a text node, the code then splits the node at the selected offset, and inserts a line break between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the node at the caret position is a text node, the code then [splits the node](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Text/splitText) into two at the selected offset, and inserts a line break between the two nodes.
```

}
```

#### Results

Click anywhere in the **Lorem ipsum ...** paragraph below to insert a line break at the point where you click.
Note that the log shows the `nodeName`, the offset, and a fragment of the selected node with a `^` character at the offset.

{{EmbedLiveSample('Split text nodes at caret position in DOM','100%','400px')}}

### Split text nodes at caret positions in a Shadow DOM

> This example demonstrates how to get the caret position from a selected node within a shadow root.
> 
> The example is very similar to the "DOM-only example" above, except that some of the text is inside a shadow root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates how to get the caret position from a selected node within a shadow root.
The example is very similar to the "DOM-only example" above, except that some of the text is inside a shadow root.
```

}
```

#### JavaScript

```js hidden
const logElement = document.querySelector("#log");
function log(text) {
  logElement.innerText = text;
}

const reload = document.querySelector("#reset");

reload.addEventListener("click", () => {
  window.location.reload(true);
});
```

First we have some code to populate our shadow DOM.

> Here we're using JavaScript to attach a shadow root dynamically, because the MDN infrastructure does not allow us to do so declaratively using the {{htmlelement("template")}} element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're using JavaScript to attach a shadow root dynamically, because the MDN example system does not allow us to do this declaratively using the {{htmlelement("template")}} element.
```

> The content of the shadow DOM is just a {{htmlelement("span")}} element that contains the text "I'm in the shadow DOM".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The content of the shadow DOM is a {{htmlelement("span")}} element that contains the text "I'm in the shadow DOM".
```

```js
const host = document.querySelector("#host");
const shadow = host.attachShadow({ mode: "open" });
const shadowSpan = document.createElement("span");
shadowSpan.textContent = "I'm in the shadow DOM";
shadow.appendChild(shadowSpan);
```

Next we add a handler for our "Enable/Disable shadow" button.
This code just toggles the value of the `useShadows` variable and updates the button text appropriately.

```js
let useShadows = false;

const shadowButton = document.querySelector("#shadowButton");
shadowButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  useShadows = !useShadows;
  shadowButton.innerText = useShadows ? "Remove Shadow" : "Add Shadow";
});
```

The method below first checks for `document.caretPositionFromPoint` support and uses it to get the text node and offset at the caret position.
The value of the `useShadows` variable is used to determine whether the shadow root hosted in our text is passed to `caretPositionFromPoint()`.

> If the browser doesn't support that method, the code then checks for {{domxref("Document.caretRangeFromPoint", "document.caretRangeFromPoint")}}, and uses that instead.

Reviewer: Could use bullets here for the three "if" sentences, but already looking good

Author: I think that works better. Thanks.

    offset = range.startOffset;
  } else {
    // Neither method is supported, do nothing
    return;
  }

  // Logging code (uses hidden method to get substring with ^ at offset)
  if (textNode) {
    if (textNode.nodeType === 3) {
      const caretInText = getSubstringAroundOffset(
        textNode.textContent,
        offset,
      );
      log(
        `type: TEXT_NODE, name: ${textNode.nodeName}, offset: ${offset}:
${caretInText}`,
      );
    } else if (textNode.nodeType === 1) {
      log(`type: ELEMENT_NODE, name: ${textNode.nodeName}, offset: ${offset}`);
    } else {
      log(
        `type: ${textNode.nodeType}, name: ${textNode.nodeName}, offset: ${offset}`,
      );
    }
  }

  // Insert line at caret
  if (textNode?.nodeType === 3) {
    // TEXT_NODE - split text at offset and add br
    let replacement = textNode.splitText(offset);
    let br = document.createElement("br");
    textNode.parentNode.insertBefore(br, replacement);
  } else if (textNode?.nodeType === 1) {
    // ELEMENT_NODE - Add br node at offset node
    let br = document.createElement("br");
    const targetNode = textNode.childNodes[offset];
    textNode.insertBefore(br, targetNode);
  } else {

>     //Do nothing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Do nothing
```

}
```

```js hidden
// Inserts ^ at offset and gets a substring for log
function getSubstringAroundOffset(text, offset, length = 10) {
  const start = Math.max(0, offset - length);
  const end = Math.min(text.length, offset + length + 1);
  // Insert the caret character at the offset
  const modifiedText = `${text.substring(0, offset)}^${text.substring(offset)}`;
  return `...${modifiedText.substring(start, end)}...`;
}
```

```js hidden
let message = document.getElementById("message");
if (document.caretPositionFromPoint) {
  message.textContent =
    "This browser supports the standard document.caretPositionFromPoint";
  message.classList.add("supported");
} else if (document.caretRangeFromPoint) {
  message.textContent =
    "This browser supports the non-standard document.caretRangeFromPoint";
  message.classList.add("supported");
}
```

#### Results

Click in the **Lorem ipsum ...** paragraph before or after the shadow DOM text to insert a line break at the point where you click.
Note that in this case the log shows you have selected a `TEXT_NODE`, the offset, and a fragment of the selected node with a `^` character at the offset.

> Initially the shadow root is not passed to `caretPositionFromPoint()`, so if you click on the text _I'm in the shadow DOM_ the returned caret position node is the parent node of the host, at the offset of the shadow root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially the shadow root is not passed to `caretPositionFromPoint()`, so if you click on the text "I'm in the shadow DOM", the returned caret position node is the parent node of the host, at the offset of the shadow root.
```

Interesting stuff

Author: @bsmth Isn't it. I find it all quite opaque without the examples. FYI this is the model used for all new node traversal stuff that crosses into a shadow dom. Previously you had undefined behaviour if a selection occurred in the shadow dom. Now you either supply a set of shadow roots, and you get the actual node selected (if the selection is provided) or you don't, and you get the position just before the parent node hosting the root.

The line break therefore gets added before the node rather than the point you selected.
Note that the caret position node in this case has the type `ELEMENT_NODE`.

If you click the "Add shadow" button, the shadow root is passed to `caretPositionFromPoint()`, so the returned caret position is the specific selected node within the shadow DOM.

> This makes the shadow DOM text behave just like the other paragraph text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes the shadow DOM text behave like the other paragraph text.
```
